---
layout: post
title: "GRE Vocabulary – My Review Notes"
date: 2017-10-26
categories: [Others]
tags: [gre, legacy]
---

As a non-native English speaker, vocabulary is the core part to prepare for GRE exams. I spent about 200 hours (3 months, 2 hours per day) studying the GRE vocabulary, and took notes for every word I learned or that is important. Though time consuming, taking notes helps to organize what we’ve learned and benefit us in the long-term. There are about 2400+ GRE words totally along with their definitions, synonyms and sample sentences in my notes. Mastering 2400 new words is not enough, but definitely helps a lot in GRE exams. I would like to share with people about my GRE vocabulary notes and hopefully can be helpful.

Another important thing is the strategy to organize the notes. How to make it effective and easy to maintain, understand and to memorize? Here is my strategy:

Verb Section

Adj Section

– Describe Writing/Opinions

– Describe People/Behaviors

– Describe Society/Social Science

– Describe Properties/Events/Actions

– Describe Logical Relationships

Noun Section

– Related with Social Science/Philosophy/Art

– Related with Biology/Chemistry/Physics/Math/Geography

– Related with People/Opinions

– Related with Other things

Inside each small section, I tried to put as many synonyms together. For example, I put “revoke”, “repeal”, “rescind”, “abrogate”, “quash” together as they have similar meanings. Another example, I put these words together because they have similar meanings: “amicable”, “affable”, “genial”, “convivial”, “jovial”, “amiable”, “congenial”, “gregarious”, “sociable”.

For each word, I looked up the dictionary and typed the definition. Most of the definitions are from Oxford Dictionaries, and some definitions are from Cambridge Dictionaries. I also typed the sample sentences for most of the words.

The last thing is the source of these words. The note contains words from “Barron’s Essential Words for the GRE”, Magoosh Vocabulary, 考满分GRE镇考机经词, and some GRE questions. When I looked up a word in the dictionary, if I saw there were some synonyms that I hadn’t learned, I would also looked up these words and took notes for all of them, so that we could master more words for the same meaning.

Full notes are on my GitHub:

<https://github.com/lxucs/Liyan-Review-Notes/blob/master/Volcabularies_Liyan.pdf>
