---
layout: post
title: "GoLang – My Review Notes"
date: 2017-10-13
categories: [Programming]
tags: [golang, legacy]
---



Recently I spent two days learning the Go Language, and would like to share with people my review notes. Again it serves as my personal note that covers only the basic usage and may not have great readability. I was trying to organize the notes in an intuitive way and clarify the important features of GoLang. The note is also available on my Github.

An excellent source to begin with: https://tour.golang.org/welcome/

Syntax
C style, value based, no Class/Object.

Variable declaration:

1. var declares a (list of) variable, the type is last: var i int = 1

2. var declaration can include initializers, type can be omitted: var i, j = 1, 3

3. use := to short-declare variable without type ONLY when inside a function; type will be inferred from the right hand side:

        3.1 If right hand side variables are typed, the new variables are of the same type.

        3.2 If right hand side variables are untyped numeric constant, the new variables may be int, float64 or complex 128 depending on the precision of the constant.

 

Primitive type (value-based):

Type        Zero Value

bool         false

string      “”

int, uint, int16, uint16, int32, uint32, int64, uint64       0

bype(alias for uint8)               0

rune(alias for int32)                0

float32, float64                        0

complex64, complex128     0

struct: like C struct. Usually declared in conjunction with “type” keyword to define new type.

1. zero value is a struct with zero value for each of its fields.

2. Struct literal: denotes a newly allocated struct value by listing the values of its fields. Can list just a subset of fields by using the Name: syntax.

3. Fields are accessed using a dot through either pointer or actual struct.

 

Reference type: has underlying field pointing to other memory; zero value is nil.

1. Pointer: like C pointer. Assign: p := &i; Use: *p = 21

2. Slice: like vector or ArrayList, has underlying array and dynamically controls array size.

        2.1 Syntax: []T is a slice with elements of type T: var s []int

        2.2 Initialization:

                2.2.1 Slice literal: like an array literal without the length: q := []int{2, 3, 5}

                2.2.2 Make function: a := make([]int, l1, l2) //len(a) = l1, cap(a) = l2

                2.2.3 By slicing an existing slice or array: s[2:4] //s can be array or slice

                2.2.4 nil slice has no underlying array, with cap() = 0.

        2.3 Access: like Python, [); default is zero for the low bound and the length of the slice for the high bound.

        2.4 Comparison?

        2.5 copy and append: func append(s []T, x …T) []T appends the elements x to the end of the slice s, and grows the slice if a greater capacity is needed. Appending on nil slice is allowed.

        2.6 Slice internals: three fields: pointer to the array (doesn’t have to be the first array element), length of segment, capacity (start point to the end of underlying array). When slicing a slice (such as s[2:4]), it creates a new slice value pointing to the original array.

        2.7 Range: range form of the for loop iterates over a slice or map.

3. Map: maps keys to values.

        3.1 Syntax: var m map[KeyType]ValueType

        3.2 Initialization:

               3.2.1 Map literal: like struct literals, but the keys are required: var m = map[string]int{“X1”: 1, “X2”: 2}

               3.2.2 Make function: m := make(map[string]int)

        3.3 Access: insert/update: m[key] = elem; retrieve: elem = m[key]; like C++ map, zero value of value type is retrieved if key is not in the map.

               3.3.1 Test if key is present: elem, ok = m[key]

        3.4 Range: range form of the for loop iterates over a slice or map.

        3.5 Concurrency: Maps are not safe for concurrent use; multi-thread access must be protected by some kind of synchronization mechanism, such as sync.RWMutex.

4. Interface: an interface type is defined as a set of method signatures.

        4.1 zero value is nil! Calling a method on a nil interface is a run-time error because there is no type inside the interface tuple to indicate which concrete method to call.

        4.2 Common interfaces:

               4.2.1 Stringer with String() string method.

               4.2.2 error with Error() string method.

               4.2.3 io.Reader with Read([]byte) (int, error) method.

 

Const: can be character, string, boolean, numeric values: const Pi = 3.14

Untyped numeric constants takes the type by its context.

 

Type Conversion: T(v). Assignment between items of different types requires explicit conversion.

 

Flow Control

If:

1. No parentheses required to surround the expression.

2. if can start with a short statement to execute before the condition. Variables declared by the statement are only in scope inside if and its else blocks.

for:

1. Basic form: three components separated by semicolons without parentheses: for i := 0; i < 10; i++

2. While form: drop the semicolons: for sum < 1000

3. Range form: iterate over a slice or map: for i, v := range pow

        3.1 skip the index or value by assigning to _: for _, value := range pow

        3.2 only want the index, drop the “, value” entirely: for i := range pow

4. Forever: omit loop condition: for {}

5. Variables declared in the expression are visible only in the scope of the for statement.

 

Function:

1. Functions are values too. They can be passed around just like other values, with parameters and return values as signature.

2. Function can return multiple values.

3. Parameters can be packed and unpacked by using …

4. Defer: A defer statement defers the execution of a function until the surrounding function returns. Deferred function calls are pushed onto a stack. When a function returns, its deferred calls are executed in last-in-first-out order.

5. Function closures: a closure is a function value that references variables from outside its body.

6. Methods: define methods on types (like object instance method), add receiver argument between the func keyword and the method name.

        6.1 No matter receiver is type or pointer, the method can be called by either! Compiler automatically adapt the form upon call.

        6.2 However, only when receiver is pointer, the method can change the field values. Also it reduces copy overhead.

 

Concurrency:

1. Channel: like a concurrent, shared queue for communication. By default, sends and receives block until the other side is ready.

        1.1 Syntax: ch := make(chan int) or ch := make(chan int, 100) //buffered size is 100

        1.2 Send: ch <- v; Receive: v := <-ch

        1.3 for range loop: the loop will stop when the channel is closed. You don’t usually need to close them. Closing is only necessary when the receiver must be told there are no more values coming, such as to terminate a range loop.

2. Mutex: mutual exclusive lock, like intrinsic/monitor lock in Java; sync.Mutex with Lock() and Unlock() methods.

Build & Package (Go Tool)
Workspaces: typically keep all Go code in a single workspace, a directory hierarchy with three directories at its root:

        * src contains Go source files

        * pkg contains package objects

        * bin contains executable commands

GOPATH environment variable (workspace): set up GOPATH and PATH in ~/.bash_profile:

        * export GOPATH=$HOME/workXXX

        * export PATH=PATH:
(go env GOPATH)/bin

Package name: first statement in a Go source file; the package name is the last element of the import path.

        * Executable commands must always use package main.

Import path: a string that uniquely identifies a package; package’s import path corresponds to its location inside a workspace.

Install (bin or library): go install $GOPATH/src/PACKAGEPATH; go install (if inside the package directory).

        * It builds and produces an executable binary/library, then installs that binary to the workspace’s bin/pkg directory.

        * Whenever the go tool installs a package or binary, it also installs whatever dependencies it has.

Testing: write a test by creating a file with a name ending in _test.go that contains functions named TestXXX with signature func (t *testing.T).

        * Run test: go test PACKAGEPATH
