---
layout: post
title: "System (5): Inter Process Communication (IPC) Part 2"
date: 2019-11-14
categories: [System]
tags: [system, ipc]
math: true
---

This article is part of my review notes of "Unix System Programming" course. In this post, we continue the topic in the last post: Inter Process Communication (IPC). We will discuss another kind of technique: **shared memory** and **semaphore**.

## Shared Memory

The difference between shared memory and previous techniques (pipe, FIFO, message queue) is:
* Shared memory doesn't require system call to read or write data, whereas all pipe, FIFO, message queue require system call each time to read/write data, which brings context switch and overhead.
* The system calls for pipe, FIFO, message queue will use the blocking behavior by default to handle consumer-producer problem, while shared memory needs manual control to achieve synchronization using semaphore.

The system call to create or get a shared memory segment is ([man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmget.2.html)):

```int shmget(key_t key, size_t size, int shmflg);```

It returns a shared memory segment ID. After the call, the shared memory segment is in the system. However, since each process operates on its own address space, this segment cannot be used directly. To use it in a process, we need to attach it to the process' address space. The system call to do the attachment is ([man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmat.2.html)):

```void *shmat(int shmid, const void *shmaddr, int shmflg);```

The return value is the starting address of the attached shared memory segment. Now we can use this address directly in the process to do any read and write.

To destroy a shared memory segment, we can use the system call ([man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmctl.2.html)):

```int shmctl(int shmid, int cmd, struct shmid_ds *buf);```

And use the **IPC_RMID** flag to destroy.

## Memory Management Unit

Now, we have encountered several scenarios where we need to map between logical memory address and physical memory address:
* We have a shared memory segment with physical address, and we need to map it to logical address, so that a process can attach to its address space.
* OS needs to map each process's logical address space to physical address, so that OS can access each process's Ublock and manage upon.
* When we do `fork()`, the text segment is not copied; the child process just has a logical address mapping of the parent's text segment.
* There is only one copy of shared libraries in memory; each process has a logical address mapping of the shared libraries.

Therefore, it is not surprising that there is hardware support for the translation between logical/virtual memory address and physical memory address, and it is called Memory Management Unit ([MMU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_management_unit)).

MMU splits a 32-bit address into two parts: 22-bit page number, and 10-bit data number. The translation happens on the page number. MMU maintains a page table, where the logical page number can be mapped to the physical page number.

Back to the shared memory case, OS and MMU will ensure any newly created shared memory segment is disjoint from any other segment. Each process can just use logical address without worrying about any translation.

## Semaphore

Since shared memory segment won't have any blocking restriction, we need to manually control the synchronization between consumer and producer. We need a variable to represent whether how many a certain resources are available. This variable needs to satisfy a special property: **atomic** test-and-set. Otherwise, a code like this can have race condition:

```
if(test(resource)) {
    set(resource);  // set resource to be not available
    // proceed
} else {
    // resource not available
}
```

If process A has executed `test()` but haven't executed `set()`, another process B might also execute `test()` and pass the check. The test-and-set has to be **atomic**, and the atomicity can be achieved by OS.

POSIX has provided a special type of variable that guarantees the atomicity, called [semaphore](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semaphore_(programming)).

In convention, we denote two atomic operations on a semaphore `S`, called `P(S)` (representing lock) and `V(S)` (representing unlock):
* `P(S)`: (1) `S--` (2) block the process if `S < 0`
* `V(S)`: (1) `S++` (2) unblock a waiting process if `S <= 0`

The general framework is: `P(S)` to use a resource, `V(S)` to release a resource.

We can see that when `S >= 0`, `S` represents the number of resources available; when `S < 0`, the absolute value of `S` represents the number of blocked/waiting processes.

### Deadlock

The semaphore seems to resolve the synchronization problem, but it brings another problem when there are multiple resources. If there are two types of resources `S=1` and `T=1`, and two processes want to use them both:
* Process A: `P(S); P(T); ... V(T); V(S);`
* Process B: `P(T); P(S); ... V(S); V(T)`

These two processes can be waiting for each other forever: A is waiting for resource `T` which requires B to release, and B is waiting for resource `S` which requires A to release. This kind of circular waiting problem is called deadlock.

To resolve the deadlock, POSIX provides system calls that work on a set of semaphores. Whenever a process needs multiple resources, it asks for a set of semaphores directly, instead of manually handling multiple singular semaphores. The system call will take care of the order.

The system call to get a single or set of semaphores is ([man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/semget.2.html)):

```int semget(key_t key, int nsems, int semflg);```

To operate on the semaphore, the system call is ([man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/semop.2.html)):

```int semop(int semid, struct sembuf *sops, size_t nsops);```

If we don't want the process to be blocked if any resources are not available, we can specify the flag **IPC_NOWAIT**, similar to message queue.

### Case Study

If there is a shared memory segment that contains a single number, and process A is producing the number, while process B is consuming the number, how to synchronize A and B, such that A will produce number after B consumes it, and B will consume number after A produces it?

Here is the solution:

Semaphore with initial value:
S                T\
\------------------\
0                1

Execution:

Thread A              Thread B\
\-----------------------------\
P(T)                  P(S)\
produce               consume\
V(S)                  V(T)

This is a consumer-producer problem with only one element in the pool. Later in this series, we will see a more generalized version, where the pool can have more than one capacity.
