---
layout: post
title: "Notes on ML Basics"
date: 2022-09-02
categories: [Notes]
tags: [ML]
math: true
hidden: true
---

## Calculus Basics

Gradient: 斜率; therefore, going along with gradient will increase; thus, GD has form: $x - \eta \nabla f(x)$\
For non-smooth functions e.g. L1 reg, we can use proximal gradient descent.

Chain rule: let $y = f(g(x)) = f(u)$. The derivative of $x$ regarding $y$ is: $\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{dy}{du} \cdot \frac{du}{dx}$

Multi-variate chain rule: if $y = f(g_1(x), g_2(x)) = f(u_1, u_2)$, The derivative of $x$ regarding $y$ is: $\frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{dy}{du_1}\frac{du_1}{dx} + \frac{dy}{du_2}\frac{du_2}{dx}$

Backpropagation: TODO

Talyor's Theorem (高阶导数逼近 near $a$): $f(x) \approx \sum_{k=0}^n \frac{f^{(k)}(a)}{k!} (x-a)^k $

### Convex Optimization

Lagrangian Duality:
* For a constrained optimization problem on $x$, convert to an unconstrained optimization problem that introduces $\lambda$.
* Solve a harder unconstrained optimization problem ($min_x$ conditioned on $max_{\lambda}$) to an easier unconstrained optimization problem ($max_{\lambda}$ conditioned on $min_x$).
  * See the formulation on $max_{\lambda}$: <https://www-cs.stanford.edu/people/davidknowles/lagrangian_duality.pdf>
  * Solution of the dual is a lower bound to the solution of the primal, and will be optimal under certain conditions.
    * Specifically, KKT conditions: complementary slackness (which says the extra added term should have no effect (= 0))
  * $max_{\lambda}$ conditioned on $min_x$ will always be convex/concave (regard $x$ as constant); therefore if $min_x$ is easy to get first (regard $\lambda$ as constant), then the problem is solved.
  * To get $min_x$ first, either:
    * Analytically: regarding $\lambda$ as constant and set derivative to 0 for each $x_i$, combined with KKT conditions.
    * Other numerical optimization method (iterative solution e.g. interior point method), combined with KKT conditions.
* <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uh1Dk68cfWs>
* <https://cs229.stanford.edu/section/cs229-cvxopt2.pdf>

Linear programming:
* Simplex method.

### SVM

SVM overlooks the ENTIRE feature space geometry and tries to find the best boundary,
different from logistic regression that only focuses on SINGLE point at a time.

Therefore, SVM leverages the point metric (distance/similarity/proximity);
linear SVM uses dot-product of feature vectors ($x_1 \cdot x_2$) as similarity metric.

To obtain more complex decision boundary, we need to map feature to higher dimensional space and obtain similarity: $f(x_1) \cdot f(x_2)$.\
However, we can circumvent "high-dim mapping then (simple) similarity" by "(low-dim) similarity then (simple) mapping", finding $g$ such that $f(x_1) \cdot f(x_2) = g(x_1, x_2)$ where $g$ is much simpler than $f$.\
$g$ is called the kernel that represents the similarity metric in higher-dim feature space.

* [Polynomial kernel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynomial_kernel)
* [RBF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radial_basis_function_kernel): $\mathrm{exp}(-\gamma \Vert x_1 - x_2 \Vert^2)$ which can represent INFINITE feature space (as exponential function expands to infinite polynomial by Taylor series)

Solving: convert to dual problem then use numerical optimization


## Linear Algebra

A * Diag: elementwise multiplication per column\
Diag * A: elementwise multiplication per row

Eigenvalues/eigenvectors: matrix (linear transformation) will not change the direction of certain vectors (only changing the scale); these vectors and scalars can be the representatives of this transformation (matrix).

Eigendecomposition: $Av = \lambda v \implies AQ = Q\Lambda \implies A = Q\implies Q^{-1}$

definite matrix: if any vectors after a transformation (matrix) still has a positive projection to original, or $z^TAz > 0$ for any $z$.
* A matrix is positive definite if and only if all its eigenvalues are positive.


## Basics Recap

Bias-Variance decomposition of MSE: E(error) = bias^2 + variance + irreducible noise

Also see law-of-total-variance in uncertainty post.

How to avoid overfit? (1) reduce model complexity, add regularization (or add parameter priori from Bayesian pov) (2) data augmentation ...

Inductive bias: a learning algorithm to prioritize one solution (or interpretation) over another, independent of the observed data. E.g. priori, regularization, architecture.

Bootstrap: sampling WITH replacement (~63.2%); can provide the estimated distribution.

Feature selection:
* correlation with labels, mutual information with labels, ...
* L1 reg, random forest feature importance

PCA: linear transformation on data that captures max variance (each principal component is orthogonal)
* [Tutorial](http://www.cs.otago.ac.nz/cosc453/student_tutorials/principal_components.pdf)

Metrics:
* AUC: TPR vs. FPR (how well the model can distinguish/separate two classes); AUC = 任意正样本的score大于负样本的score的概率(the probability that a uniformly drawn random positive has a higher score than a uniformly drawn random negative)
* AUPR: better for class imbalance (AUC being too optimistic; see [AUC](https://towardsdatascience.com/imbalanced-data-stop-using-roc-auc-and-use-auprc-instead-46af4910a494))

KL divergence: can be seen as $KL(q \Vert p) = H(p, q) - H(q)$

Mutual information: $KL(P(X, Y) \Vert P(X)P(Y))$

HMM:
* Forward algorithm: marginal probability at a step (marginalize over hidden states at each step)
* Viterbi algorithm: joint probability over a sequence (DP that searches over previous sequence; taking single sequence w/o marginalization (max vs. sum))

Linear-chain CRF: similar to HMM that maximizes the **sequence probability** (each step not independent), where transition probability (priori) and emission probability (likelihood) are both estimated by model directly.
* See my implementation; operate on log-space
* Each forward step: first obtain priori (by applying transition), then normalize by likelihood (emission)

Naive Bayes:
* No parameters; calculate statistics of priori and likelihood
* Likelihood of multi-feature representation (e.g. words): assuming feature independence (limitation)
* Discrete likelihood: counting & smoothing; Continuous likelihood: variational

Pattern matching/searching (search patterns in string):
* Rabin-Karp: compare hashing between pattern and substring
* Prefix-suffix preprocessing: KMP (single pattern, 1D version of AC), Aho-Corasick (multi-pattern using Trie tree)
* Boyer–Moore

Decision trees: for training, choose a split on a variable that achieves better label purity, until stopping criteria.
* For continuous variable, choose certain candidate splits based on training set statistics

* Boosting: each learner is sequentially conditioned (increase model complexity); see blog
  * Gradient boosting: each learner focuses on previous's residual only (e.g. xgboost)
  * Forward stagewise boosting: each learner focuses on global optimization directly (e.g. adaboost)
* Bagging: each learner is INDEPENDENT (reduce variance); see blog

Tokenization:
* BPE: iteratively merge frequent consecutive tokens; a greedy way for compression
* Dictionary tokenization: based on dictionary, for each token: for start (to right) for end (to left) try
* [中文分词](https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/50444885); 正向/反向最大匹配分词算法

Transformers:
* MLM why random 10% unchanged? Make sure the final hidden state to utilize itself as well (no train/test gap), in addition to context; nevertheless, the real objective is to obtain high-quality representation, not only the MLM classification accuracy
* MLM why random 10% replacement (not MASK)? Make sure to always use context, even without MASK (close train/test gap when w/ mask or w/o mask)
* Self-attention why scaled by sqrt(d)? To keep unit std <https://ai.stackexchange.com/questions/41861/why-use-a-square-root-in-the-scaled-dot-product>

